WHAT INFLUENCE DOES THE UNITED
STATES HAVE AS ISRAEL SEEKS TO
AVENGE THE SLAUGHTER OF 1200
PEOPLE ON OCTOBER 7TH, AND TO
REMOVE HAMAS FROM POWER IN
GAZA.
OUR FIRST GUEST TONIGHT, JOSH
BALL, RESIGN FROM THE STATE
DEPARTMENT SOON AFTER OCTOBER
7TH, IN PROTEST OF WHAT HE SAID
WERE AN SCRUTINIZED U.S. ARMS
TRANSFERS TO ISRAEL.
IN HIS RESIGNATION LETTER, HE
SAID THE ISRAELI RESPONSE AND
AMERICAN SUPPORT QUOTE, WILL
ONLY LEAD TO MORE WAR AND
DEEPER SUFFERING AND FOR BOTH
THE ISRAELI AND PALESTINIAN
PEOPLE, AND IS NOT IN THE LONG
TERM AMERICAN INTEREST.
JOSH PAUL IS JOINING ME NOW,
WELCOME TO THE PROGRAM.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR
HAVING ME.
>> I WAS STRUCK BY WHAT THE
U.S. DEFENSE SECRETARY SAID.
THIS IS A VERY BOLD, MILITARY
ASSESSMENT, THAT THIS AMOUNT OF
CIVILIAN KILLING IS GOING TO
LEAD NOT ONLY TO THIS TRAGEDY
THAT THE WORLD IS WITNESSING,
BUT A STRATEGIC HE, USE THE
WORD, DEFEAT.
SO TELL ME, HOW DO YOU ASSESS
WHAT HE SAID?
>> I THINK HE'S RIGHT, AND I
THINK WHAT YOU SEE IS A TENSION
BETWEEN THOSE OF US WHO HAVE
WORKED IN POLITICAL AND
MILITARY FIELDS ON THE GROUND,
IN THE MIDDLE EAST, AND IN THE
DEFENSE ESTABLISHMENT IN THE
UNIFORM SERVICES, WHO
UNDERSTAND THAT THIS IS NOT
GOING TO WORK.
THIS IS NOT GOING TO LEAD TO
THE RESULT THAT ISRAEL WANTS,
IT IS JUST GOING TO PROLONG THE
SUFFERING OF BOTH THE ISRAELI
--
FOR ANOTHER GENERATION.
AS OPPOSED TO A VERY POLITICAL,
IDEOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE, THAT
IS COMING FROM THE POLITICAL
LEVEL IN THE U.S. AND IN ISRAEL,
AND IN THE UK.
THAT THINKS THERE IS A WAY TO
MAKE THIS WORK.
THERE IS NOT, AND THE SUFFERING
WE HAVE SEEN ON THE GROUND
REALLY REFLECTS THAT.
I CAN'T RECALL A TIME IN MY
EXPERIENCE, WE HAVE SEEN SUCH A
DISCONNECT BETWEEN OUR VALUES
AND OUR ACTIONS, OR BETWEEN THE
PERSPECTIVES OF POLITICAL
LEADERSHIP, AT THE REALITIES ON
THE GROUND.
>> CAN I ASK YOU WHERE AND HOW
YOU DRAW THAT LINE AND MAKE
THAT --
ISRAEL HAS GONE TO WAR AGAINST
HAMAS AND GAZA, AND IT'S NOT
THE FIRST TIME THAT THERE IS
BEEN BACKLASH AROUND THE WORLD.
WHAT MAKES YOU SAY THAT THIS IS
SO DIFFERENT TO HAVE CAUSED YOU
TO RESIGN.
>> A NUMBER OF FACTORS.
THE FIRST OF WHICH IS THE SCOPE
AND THE SCALE.
HERE WE ARE, TWO MONTHS INTO
THIS CONFLICT, AND WE HAVE SEEN
THREE TIMES MORE CHILDREN DIE,
6000 IN GAZA, THEN IN TWO YEARS
OF RUSSIA'S WAR AGAINST
UKRAINE.
WE HAVE SEEN OVER 50 JOURNALIST
KILLED.
OVER 100 YUAN AID WORKERS, OVER
200 MEDICAL PROFESSIONALS.
DO YOU KNOW WHAT IT TAKES TO BE
A DOCTOR IN GAZA?
>> WE'VE INTERVIEWED A LOT OF
THEM, AND IT'S A TERRIBLE
SITUATION.
>> THE SCALE OF THE LOSS HAS
BEEN ASTOUNDING, AND OF COURSE
MY ROLE IN THE STATE DEPARTMENT
INVOLVES IMPROVING --
GOING TO ISRAEL RIGHT NOW.
THEY ARE ENABLING THIS KILLING.
>> THIS IS AMERICAN POLICY,
IT'S NOT LIKE THESE ARE ROGUE
TRANSFERS.
THIS IS AMERICAN POLICY,
BIPARTISAN, DECADES LONG.
ISRAEL IS AMERICA'S STRONGEST
ALLY IN THE MIDDLE EAST, AND
AMERICA PROVIDES THE MOST AID
IN THE WORLD TO ISRAEL, AND
OBVIOUSLY TO EGYPT AS WELL, BUT
IN GENERAL TO ISRAEL.
AGAIN, WHAT IS SO ON
SCRUTINIZED ABOUT THIS.
WHAT WAS SO DIFFERENT THAT MADE
YOU RESIGN PUBLICLY?
>> IN ALL THE ARMS TRANSFERS
I'VE BEEN PART OF DISCUSSING
BEFORE, INCLUDING TO ISRAEL,
THERE'S ALWAYS BEEN SPACE FOR
DISCUSSION AND DEBATE.
YOU CAN RAISE CONCERNS ABOUT
HOW THESE ARMS ARE GOING TO BE
USED.
DO WE HAVE CONFIDENCE THAT THE
LAWS OF WAR, LOTS OF
PROPORTIONALITY, ARE GOING TO
BE RESPECTED.
DO WE HAVE CONCERNS ABOUT SOME
OF THE UNITS THAT THESE ARMS
MAY BE GOING TO?
AND THEIR TRACK RECORDS?
WHAT WAS DIFFERENT HERE WAS
THAT THERE WAS NO DISCUSSION,
THERE IS NO SPACE FOR THAT
DISCUSSION, THERE WAS SIMPLY AN
APPROACH CENTRALLY THE BARN
DOORS ARE OPEN, AND THAT
REMAINS THE CASE.
THE WALL STARTED --
IN THE LAST COUPLE DAYS THAT
THE AMERICA HAS TRANSFERRED --
GUIDANCE KITS, AND 45,000
ARTILLERY SHELLS.
THE BUNDLES REMAIN OPEN, AND
WELL I'M CERTAINLY ENCOURAGED
TO HEAR WHAT VICE PRESIDENT
HARRIS SAID, WHAT SECRETARY
AUSTIN HAS SAID, FOR AS LONG AS
THOSE BARN DOORS ARE OPEN, I
CAN'T REALLY KNOW WHY THOSE
ISRAEL WOULD TAKE THOSE
WARNINGS SERIOUSLY.
>> CAN I READ THE STATE
DEPARTMENT RESPONSE YOUR
RESIGNATION?
BASICALLY HE'S SAYING THAT HE
--
IS DIFFERENT BELIEFS, AND OF
COURSE ONE THING THAT IS
INTERESTING FOR ALL OF US, IS
TO KNOW THAT THERE IS A DISSENT,
THERE IS AN OFFICIAL DISTANT
CHANNEL IN THE THE STATE
DEPARTMENT TO THAT ALLOWS
PEOPLE TO AIR THEIR CONCERNS.
THAT WAS HISTORY, FROM THE
VIETNAM WAR.
THIS IS WHAT THE STATE
DEPARTMENT SAYS ABOUT YOU, WITH
RESPECT TO THIS SPECIFIC
CRITICISM THAT HAS BEEN AIRED,
WE'VE MADE VERY CLEAR THAT WE
STRONGLY SUPPORT ISRAEL'S RIGHT
TO DEFEND ITSELF.
WE ARE GOING TO CONTINUE
PROVIDING THE SECURITY
ASSISTANCE THAT THEY NEED TO
DEFEND THEMSELVES.
BUT THE PRESIDENT AND THE
SECRETARY OF STATE HAS STATE
SPOKEN TO THIS VERY CLEARLY
THAT WE EXPECT ISRAEL TO ABIDE
BY ALL INTERNATIONAL LAW, AS
THEY DEFEND THEMSELVES.
ISRAEL SAYS IT'S DOING THAT TO
THE BEST OF ITS ABILITY.
>> I THINK WE HAVE A
RESPONSIBILITY AS THE LARGER,
MORE POWERFUL PARTNER IN THIS
RELATIONSHIP, TO GIVE ADVICE.
TO GIVE GUIDANCE.
TO STEP IN WHEN THINGS ARE NOT
GOING RIGHT.
WHEN WE SAY THAT WE HAVE THE
RESPONSIBILITY TO, FOR THEIR
COMMITMENT, TO DEFEND ISRAEL,
TO SUPPORT ISRAELI SECURITY,
AND THEN WE HAVE TO LOOK AT THE
SITUATION ON THE GROUND AND SAY,
IS THAT WHAT'S ACTUALLY
HAPPENING?
IS ISRAEL MORE SECURE, AS A
RESULT OF OUR ASSISTANCE?
OR HAS OUR MILITARY ASSISTANCE
ENABLED ISRAEL TO MOVE AHEAD
WITH THE EXPANSION OF
SETTLEMENTS IN THE WEST BANK?
TO CONTINUE THE SIEGE OF GAZA?
AND TO TAKE STEPS THAT
ULTIMATELY UNDERMINE ITS OWN
SECURITY, RATHER THAN LEADING
TO A COMPREHENSIVE PEACE?
>> AS YOU KNOW, THE U.S.
ADMINISTRATION BELIEVES, AND
WHETHER IT SAYS IT PUBLICLY OR
BEHIND CLOSED DOORS, THAT THE
ONLY WAY TO GET --
FOR INSTANCE, ISN'T THERE IS NO
SECRET THAT THERE IS NO LOVE
LOST BETWEEN BIDEN AND
NETANYAHU BEFORE THIS.
OVER THE ATTEMPTED, ESSENTIALLY,
THESE ARE MY WORDS, OF THE
OVERTHROW OF THE DEMOCRATIC
SYSTEM, IN THE JUDICIAL REFORM.
BIDEN DIDN'T EVEN INVITE HIM TO
THE WHITE HOUSE.
IT'S A TOTAL RARITY.
HOWEVER, THEY BELIEVE THAT IN
ORDER TO AFFECT ISRAELI
POLICIES, THE LIKE OF WHICH
WE'RE TALKING, TO AFFECT THE
POLICY AND MAKE IT MORE TOWARDS
THE PEACE PROCESS, THEY HAVE TO
EMBRACE ISRAEL, DEFEND ISRAEL,
SUPPORT ISRAEL.
IN ORDER TO GET THE TRUST OF
THE ISRAELI PEOPLE.
SO THE THEY CAN THEN SPEAK
CLEARLY TO THE ISRAELI
GOVERNMENT.
AND YOU SAW UNDER THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION, THE PEOPLE OF
ADMINISTER ISRAEL DIDN'T
SUPPORT THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION, THEY THOUGHT
OBAMA DIDN'T SUPPORT THEM.
>> FIRST OF ALL I WOULD ASK FOR
THAT EMBRACE GETS THE UNITED
STATES.
IF YOU LOOK AT WHAT'S UNFOLDING
RIGHT NOW, IT'S ALL NOT ONLY A
DISASTER IN GAZA, BUT IT'S A
FOREIGN POLICY DISASTER FOR THE
UNITED STATES, ACROSS THE ARAB
WORLD, AND THANK FRANKLY ACROSS
THE GLOBAL SOUTH.
I THINK WE SEEM LIKE HYPOCRITES
WHEN WE CRITICIZE RUSSIA FOR
HUMAN RIGHTS EXCUSES, BUT
FAILED TO DO IT WITH ISRAEL.
I THINK OUR EMBRACE, WE HAVE TO
BE CAREFUL WITH THAT EMBRACE,
BECAUSE IT DRAWS US IN AS WELL.
SECONDLY, OF COURSE, THE ANSWER
IS THAT WE DO HAVE LEVERAGE
THAT WE CAN USE WITHIN THAT
EMBRACE.
I'M NOT SUGGESTING THAT AMERICA
SHOULD NOT REMAIN CLOSE WITH
ISRAEL.
I'M SUGGESTING SIMPLY THAT, AS
WE ARE THE PROVIDER OF ARMS, AS
WE ARE THE PROVIDER OF BILLIONS
OF DOLLARS OF TAXPAYER FUNDED
ASSISTANCE EVERY YEAR, TO WHAT
IS ACTUALLY A WEALTHY COUNTRY,
WE DO HAVE A FAIR AMOUNT OF
LEVERAGE, AND OF COURSE WE
PROVIDE ISRAEL WITH THE
SECURITY AND DIPLOMATIC BACK UP
ACROSS THE REGION THAT HAS
ENABLED ITS INTEGRATION.
WE HAVE A LOT OF LEVERAGE HERE,
TO SET ISRAEL ON A BETTER PATH,
AND TO END THIS SENSELESS
KILLING GAZA.
WE ARE NOT USING IT.
>> HOW DOES WHAT HAPPENED ON
OCTOBER 7TH AND ISRAEL, WAS
BARBARIC.
IT WAS SAVAGE.
WE'VE HEARD THE STORIES OF IN
GANG, OF CHILDREN BEING SHOT TO
DEATH IN FRONT OF THEIR PARENTS,
WE KNOW WHAT'S HAPPENED WITH
MORE THAN 250 PEOPLE WHO HAVE
BEEN TAKEN HOSTAGE, INCLUDING
BABIES.
HOW DOES A NATION GET --
I DON'T EVEN KNOW WHAT THE
RIGHT WHERE IT IS.
BEYOND IT?
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THE RIGHT
WORD IS.
HOW DOES IT GET TO FEEL THAT
IT'S BEING SUPPORTED, AND THEN
IT THEN DOESN'T HAVE TO DO
WHAT'S --
GAZA, GOING ON RIGHT NOW.
THE ELDERS, WHICH IS A GROUP OF
FORMER PRESIDENTS, PRIME
MINISTERS, AND EVEN OFFICIALS,
HAVE ALSO QUESTIONED NOW, THEY
JUST PUT OUT A STATEMENT
QUESTIONING ARMS TRANSFERS, AND
TALKING ABOUT THE INHUMANITY
THAT HAPPENED IN GAZA, THAT IS
RISING TO AN INTOLERABLE LEVEL.
>> I THINK WHAT HAPPENED ON
OCTOBER 7TH WAS AN ABSOLUTE
ATROCITY, IT WAS 1000
ATROCITIES.
I THINK AT THE SAME TIME, WE
CONDEMN THOSE ATROCITIES, WE
HAVE TO CONDEMN THE ATROCITIES
THAT HAPPENED EVERY DAY TO
PALESTINIANS IN THE WEST BANK.
YOU MENTIONED SEXUAL VIOLENCE.
I WAS PART OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS
VETTING PROCESS FOR ARMS GOING
TO ISRAEL, AND A CHARITY CALLED
DEFENSIVE CHILDREN
INTERNATIONAL PALESTINE TO OUR
ATTENTION AT THE STATE
DEPARTMENT TO THE SEXUAL
ASSAULT, THE OF A 13 YEAR OLD
BOY THAT OCCURRED IN AN ISRAELI
PRISON, IN JERUSALEM.
WE EXAMINED THESE ALLEGATIONS,
WE BELIEVE THEY WERE CREDIBLE,
WE PUT THEM TO THE GOVERNMENT
OF ISRAEL, AND YOU DON'T HAPPEN
THE NEXT DAY?
THE IDF WENT INTO THE D.C. IP
OFFICES, AND REMOVED ALL THEIR
COMPUTERS, AND DECLARED THEM A
TERRORIST ENTITY.
I THINK IT'S VITAL THAT
ATROCITIES NOT HAPPEN TO ANYONE,
NOT SEXUAL ATROCITIES,
VIOLATIONS, NOT ANY KIND OF
GROSS VIOLATION OF HUMAN
RIGHTS.
WE ARE LOOKING AT A SITUATION
WHERE THERE IS SO MUCH
DEHUMANIZATION, WHERE PEOPLE
ARE NOT SEEN FOR THE VALUE THAT
THEY HAVE.
AND I THINK THAT'S TRUE WHETHER
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT THOSE WHO
ATTACKED ON THEIR KIBBUTZ, AND
THOSE WHO ARE ATTACKED IN THEIR
HOMES IN GAZA.
, OR IN THE WEST BANK.
WHAT WE REALLY NEED IS TO
CENTER THE HUMAN BEINGS WHO ARE
AT THE CORE, AND WHO ARE
SUFFERING SO MUCH IN THIS
COMPLEX.
>> DO YOU BELIEVE THAT, IN
ORDER TO HAVE SOME KIND OF
PEACEFUL RESOLUTION, SO THIS
NEVER HAPPENS AGAIN, THAT HAMAS
HAS TO BE REMOVED FROM POWER?
>> HOW DO YOU NEUTRALIZE HAMAS?
THE ANSWER IS, THROUGH A
LASTING POLITICAL SETTLEMENT
THAT PROVIDES A PALESTINIAN
STATE.
NOT A PROCESS THAT PROMISES ONE,
HOLDS THE PROMISE, AND NEVER
GETS TO IT.
YOU NEUTRALIZE HAMAS BY SHOWING
THE PALESTINIAN PEOPLE THAT IF
THEY WANT TO SUCCEED, IF THEY
WANT TO SUCCEED THE ROUTE IS
THERE FOR THEM TO DO SO THROUGH
A POLITICAL PROCESS, RATHER
THAN THROUGH VIOLENT
RESISTANCE.
UNTIL WE HAVE THAT PROCESS IN
PLACE, YOU CANNOT DEFEAT THE
PALESTINIAN RESISTANCE.